 
ANALYZING MALICIOUS DOCU MENTS  
This cheat sheet outlines tips and tools for analyzing 
malicious docu ments, such as Microsoft Office, RTF , 
and PDF files. 
General Approach  to Document Analysis  
1. Examine the document for anomalies, such as 
risky tags, scripts , and embedded artifacts . 
2. Locate embedded code, such as shellcode, 
macros, JavaScript,  or other suspicious objects.  
3. Extract suspicious code or object s from the file . 
4. If relevant, deobfuscate and examine macros, 
JavaScript, or other embedded code . 
5. If relevant, emulate, disassemble and/or debug 
shellcode  that you extracted from the document . 
6. Understand the next steps in the infection chain.  
Microsoft Office Format  Notes  
Binary  Microsoft Office document  files (.doc, .xls, 
etc.) use the OLE2 (a.k.a. Structured Storage) for mat.  
SRP streams in OLE2 documents sometimes store a 
cached version of earlier VBA macro code . 
OOXML document files  (.docx, .xlsm, etc .) supported 
by M icrosoft  Office are compressed zip archives . 
VBA m acros in OOXML documents  are stored inside 
an OLE2 binary file , which is within the zip archive . 
Excel supports XLM macros that are embedded as 
formulas in sheets without the OLE2 binary file.  
RTF documents don’t support macros  but can contain 
malicious  embedded files and  objects.  
Useful MS Office File Analysis Commands  
zipdump.py  
file.pptx  Examine  contents of OOXML 
file file.pptx . 
zipdump.py  
file.pptx -s 3 -d Extract file with index 3 from 
file.pptx  to STDOUT.  
olevba file.xlsm  Locate and extract macros 
from file.xlsm . oledump.py  
file.xls  -i List all OLE2 streams present 
in file.xls . 
oledump.py 
file.xls  -s 3 -v Extract VBA source code 
from stream 3 in file.xls . 
xmldump.py  pretty Format XML file supplied via 
STDIN for easier analysis.  
oledump.py file.xls  -p 
plugin_http_heuristics  Find obfuscated URLs 
in file.xls  macros.  
vmonkey 
file.doc  Emulate the execution of macros 
in file.doc to analyze them . 
evilclippy  -uu 
file.ppt  Remove the password prompt 
from macros in file.ppt . 
msoffcrypto -tool 
infile.docm  
outfile.docm -p Decrypt outfile.docm  using 
specified password  to create 
outfile.docm . 
pcodedmp   
file.doc  Disassemble VBA-stomped  
p-code macro from file.doc . 
pcode2code  
file.doc  Decompile VBA -stomped  
p-code macro from file.doc . 
rtfobj.py  
file.rtf  Extract objects embedded 
into RTF file.rtf . 
rtfdump.py  
file.rtf  List groups and structure of 
RTF file file.rtf . 
rtfdump.py  
file.rtf -O Examine objects in RTF file  
file.r tf. 
rtfdump.py file.rtf  
-s 5 -H -d Extract hex contents from 
group in RTF file file.rtf . 
xlmdeobfuscator   
--file file.xlsm  Deobfuscate XLM (Excel 4) 
macros in file.xlsm . 
Risky PDF Keywords  
/OpenAction and /AA specify  the script or action to 
run automatically.  
/JavaScript , /JS, /AcroForm, and /XFA can  specify  
JavaScript to run.  
/URI  accesses a URL, perhaps for phishing . 
/SubmitForm and /GoToR  can send data to URL . 
/ObjStm can hide objects inside an object stream.  /XObject can embed an image for phishing.  
Be mindful of obfuscation with hex codes, such as 
/JavaScript vs. /J#61vaScript . (See examples .) 
Useful PDF File Analysis Commands  
pdfid.py   
file.pdf  -n Display risky keywords present in 
file file.pdf . 
pdf-parser.py  
file.pdf  -a Show stats  about keywords . Add 
“-O” to include object streams.  
pdf-parser.py 
file.pdf -o id Display contents of object id. Add 
“-d” to dump  object’s stream.  
pdf-parser.py 
file.pdf -r id Display objects that 
reference object id. 
qpdf --password=pass 
--decrypt infile.pdf 
outfile.pdf  Decrypt infile.pdf  using 
password pass  to create 
outfile.pdf . 
Shellcode and Other Analysis Commands  
xorsearch  -W  
-d 3 file.bin  Locate shellcode patterns inside 
the binary file file.bin . 
scdbgc /f 
file.bin  Emulate execution of shellcode in 
file.bin . Use “/off ” to specify offset.  
runsc32 -f 
file.bin  -n Execute shellcode in file.bin  to 
observe behavior in an isolated lab . 
base64dump.py  
file.txt  List Base64 -encoded strings 
present in file file.txt . 
numbers-to-
string.py  file Convert numbers that represent 
characters in file to a string . 
Additional Document  Analysis Tools  
SpiderMonkey , cscript , and  box-js help deobfuscate 
JavaScript that you extract from document files.  
Use the debugger built into Microsoft Office to 
deobfuscate macros in an isolated lab.  
Use AMSIScriptContentRetrieval.ps1  to observe 
Microsoft Office execute macros in an iso lated lab.  
Some automated analysis  sandboxe s can analyze 
aspects of malicious document  files.  
REMnux  distro includes many of the  free document 
analysis tool s mentioned above.  
Authored b y Lenny Zeltser  with  feedback from  Pedro Bueno  and Didier Stevens . Malicious document analysis  and related topics are covered in the SANS Institute course 
FOR610: Reverse -Engineering Malware , which Lenny co-authored . Creative Commons v3 “Attribution” License  for this cheat sheet version 4.1. More at zeltser.com/cheat -sheets . 