Haskell Cheat Sheet
Strings
Enumerations
"abc" = Unicode string, sugar for
This cheat sheet lays out the fundamental elements
[1..10] - List of numbers - 1, 2,
10.
Pa',Yb','c).
of the Haskell language: syntax, keywords and
[100..] - Infinite list of numbers - 100, 101,
'a' - Single character.
other elements. It is presented as both an ex-
102,
ecutable Haskell file and a printable document.
[110..100] - Empty list; ranges only go for-
Load the source into your favorite interpreter to Multi-line Strings Normally, it is a syntax error
wards.
play with code samples shown.
if a string has any actual newline characters. That
[0, -1 ] - Negative integers.
is, this is a syntax error:
[-100.. .-110]
Syntax error; need
stringl I "My long
[-100.. -110] for negatives.
Basic Syntax
string."
[1,3..1001, L-1,3.. 100] - List from 1 to
100 by 2, -1 to 100 by 4.
Comments
Backslashes (1) can "escape" a newline:
In fact, any value which is in the Enum class can be
A single line comment starts with and extends stringl = "My long I
used:
to the end of the line. Multi-line comments start "string."
['a' 'z'] - List of characters - a, b,
with '{-' and extend to -y. Comments can be
Z.
The area between the backslashes is ignored. New-
nested.
[1.0, 1.5 2] - 11.0,1.5,2.0.
lines in the string must be represented explicitly:
Comments above function definitions should
LUppercaseLetter .]
List of
start with '{- l' and those next to parameter types string2 = "My long n"
GeneralCategory values (from Data. Char).
with n' for compatibility with Haddock', a sys- "string."
tem for documenting Haskell code.
That is, string1 evaluates to:
Lists & Tuples
Reserved Words
My long string
- [] I Empty list.
While string2 evaluates to:
The following words are reserved in Haskell. It is a
[1,2,3] - List of three numbers.
syntax error to give a variable or a function one of My long
1 : 2 : 3 : [] I Alternate way to write lists
these names.
string
using "cons" (:) and "nil" ([1).
"abc" - List of three characters (strings are
case
import
of
Numbers
lists).
class
in
mo dule
'a' I 'b' : 'c' : [] - List of characters
data
infix
newtype
1 - Integer or Floating point
(same as "abc").
deriving
infixl
then
1.0, 1e10 - Floating point
(1,"a") I 2-element tuple of a number and a
do
infixr
type
1. syntax error
string.
else
instance
where
-1 - sugar for (negate 1)
(head, tail, 3, 'a') I 4-element tuple of
if
let
2-1 - sugar for ((-) 2 1)
two functions, a number and a character.
http://haskell.org/haddock/
2009 Justin Bailey.
1
jgbailey@codeslower.com



"Layout" rule, braces and semi-colons.
Let Indent the body of the let at least one space Nesting & Capture Nested matching and bind-
from the first definition in the let. If let appears ing are also allowed.
Haskell can be written using braces and semi-
on its own line, the body of any definition must
colons, just like C. However, no one does. Instead, appear in the column after the let:
data Maybe a i Just a I Nothing
the "layout" rule is used, where spaces represent
scope. The general rule is: always indent. When square X I
the compiler complains, indent more.
let x2
Figure 1: The definition of Maybe
X * X
in x2
Using Maybe we can determine if any choice was
Braces and semi-colons Semi-colons termi-
given using a nested match:
nate an expression, and braces represent scope. As can be seen above, the in keyword must also be
They can be used after several keywords: where, in the same column as let. Finally, when multiple anyChoicel ch i
let, do and of. They cannot be used when defin- definitions are given, all identifiers must appear in case ch of
ing a function body. For example, the below will the same column.
Nothing 1 "No choice!"
not compile.
Just (First ) 1 "First!"
Just Second 1 "Second!"
square2 X - I x*x;
Keywords
1 "Something else."
Haskell keywords are listed below, in alphabetical
However, this will work fine:
Binding can be used to manipulate the value
order.
matched:
square2 X i result
where { result = X * x; }
Case
anyChoice2 ch i
case ch of
case is similar to a swit ch statement in C# or Java,
Nothing 1 "No choice!"
Function Definition Indent the body at least but can match a pattern: the shape of the value be-
Just score@ (First "gold")1
one space from the function name:
ing inspected. Consider a simple data type:
"First with gold!"
data Choices = First String I Second I
Just score@(First ) 1
square X -
Third I Fourth
"First with something else: Il
X * X
++ show score
case can be used to determine which choice was
1 "Not first."
Unless a where clause is present. In that case, in- given:
dent the where clause at least one space from the
function name and any function bodies at least one which Choice ch i
Matching Order Matching proceeds from top to
case ch of
bottom. If
is reordered as follows,
wher
space from the e keyword:
anyChoice1
the
First 1 "1st!"
first pattern will always succeed:
square X i
Second 1 "2nd!"
anyChoice3 ch =
x2
1 "Something else."
case ch of
where x2 i
As with pattern-matching in function definitions,
1 "Something else."
X * X
the - - token is a "wildcard" matching any value.
Nothing 1 "No choice!"
2009 Justin Bailey.
2
jgbailey@codeslower.com



Just (First ) 1 "First!"
class Flavor a where
Data
Just Second 1 "Second!"
flavor : a 1 String
So-called algebraic data types can be declared as fol-
Notice that the declaration only gives the type lows:
Guards Guards, or conditional matches, can be signature of the function- -no implementation is
used in cases just like function definitions. The only
here
data MyType I MyValuel I MyValue2
given
(with some exceptions, see "Defaults"
difference is the use of the -> instead of =. Here
on page 3). Continuing, we can define several in- MyType is the type's name. MyValue1 and
is a simple function which does a case-insensitive stances:
MyValue are values of the type and are called con-
string match:
structors. Multiple constructors are separated with
instance Flavor Bool where
strcmp sl s2 l case (s1, s2) of
the 'T' character. Note that type and constructor
flavor "sweet"
(I, [ 1 True
names must start with a capital letter. It is a syntax
(sl:ssl, s2:ss2)
error otherwise.
insta ance Flavor Char where
toUpper sl ffi toUpper s2 1
flavor "sour"
strcmp ssl ss2
Constructors with Arguments The type above
otherwise 1 False
Evaluating flavor True gives:
is not very interesting except as an enumeration.
1 False
Constructors that take
can be declared,
> flavor True
arguments
"sweet' II
allowing more information to be stored:
Class
While flavor 'x' gives:
data Point = TwoD Int Int
A Haskell function is defined to work on a certain
I ThreeD Int Int Int
type or set of types and cannot be defined more > flavor 'x'
Notice that the arguments for each constructor are
than once. Most languages support the idea of "sour"
type names, not constructors. That means this kind
"overloading", where a function can have different
of declaration is illegal:
behavior depending on the type of its arguments. Defaults Default implementations can be given
Haskell accomplishes overloading through class for functions in a class. These are useful when cer- data Poly i Triangle TwoD TwoD TwoD
and instance declarations. A class defines one tain functions can be defined in terms of others in
instead, the Point type must be used:
or more functions that can be applied to any types the class. A default is defined by giving a body to
which are members (i.e., instances) of that class. A one of the member functions. The canonical exam- data Poly i Triangle Point Point Point
class is analogous to an interface in Java or C#, and ple is Eq, which defines /= (not equal) in terms of
instances to a concrete implementation of the inter- ==. :
Type and Constructor Names Type and con-
face.
class where
structor names can be the same, because they will
A class must be declared with one or more type
Eq a
never be used in a place that would cause confu-
(ffi) :alal Bool
variables. lechnically, Haskell 98 only allows one
sion. For example:
1 :alal Bool
type variable, but most implementations of Haskell
I
a b a ffi b)
data User = User String I Admin
so-called
String
support
multi-parameter type classes, which
allow more than one type variable.
Recursive definitions can be created, but an which declares a type named User with two con-
We can define a class which supplies a flavor for instance declaration must always implement at structors, User and Admin. Using this type in a
a given type:
least one class member.
function makes the difference clear:
2009 Justin Bailey.
3
jgbailey@codeslower.com



whatUser (User ) i "normal user."
same accessor function for values of the same type, Because seven of these operations are So com-
whatUser (Admin ) = "admin user."
but that can be dangerous if the accessor is not used mon, Haskell provides the der: iving keyword
by all constructors. Consider this rather contrived which will automatically implement the
Some literature refers
typeclass
to this practice as type pun-
associated
example:
on the
type. The seven supported type-
ning.
classes are: Eq, Read, Show, Ord, Enum, Ix, and
data Con = Con { conValue : String }
Bounded.
Type Variables Declaring so-called polymorphic
Uncon { conValue : String }
Two forms of deriving are possible. The first is
data types is as easy as adding type variables in
Noncon
used when a type only derives one class:
the declaration:
which Con con i " convalue is II ++
data Slotl a = Slotl a I Emptyl
conValue
I
con
data Priority = Low Medium I High
This declares a type Slot1 with two constructors,
deriving Show
If whichCon is called with a Noncon value, a runtime
Slot1 and Empty1. The Slot1 constructor can take
error will occur.
an argument of any type, which is represented by
The second is used when
classes are de-
Finally, as explained elsewhere, these names
multiple
the type variable a above.
rived:
We can also mix type variables and specific can be used for pattern matching, argument cap-
ture and "updating.'
types in constructors:
data Alarm i Soft I Loud I Deafening
data Slot2 a i Slot2 a Int I Empty2
Class Constraints Data types can be declared deriving (Read, Show)
Above, the Slot2 constructor can take a value of with class constraints on the type variables, but
any type and an Int value.
this practice is generally discouraged. It is gener- It is a syntax error to specify deriving for any other
ally better to hide the "raw" data constructors us- classes besides the six given above.
ing the module system and instead export "smart"
Record Syntax Constructor arguments can be
declared either positionally, as above, or using constructors which apply appropriate constraints.
In any case, the syntax used is:
record syntax, which gives a name to each argu-
Deriving
ment. For example, here we declare a Contact type data (Num a) => SomeNumber a = Two a a
with names for appropriate arguments:
Three a a a
See the section on deriving under the data key-
word on page 4.
data Contact i Contact { ctName : String
This declares a type SomeNumber which has one
ctl Email : String
type variable argument. Valid types are those in
1 ctPhone : String }
the Num class.
Do
These names are referred to as selector or accessor
functions and are just that, functions. They must Deriving Many types have common operations The do keyword indicates that the code to follow
start with a lowercase letter or underscore and can- which are tedious to define yet necessary, such as will be in a monadic context. Statements are sepa-
not have the same name as another function in the ability to convert to and from strings, compare rated by newlines, assignment is indicated by <-,
scope. Thus the "ct" prefix on each above. Mul- for equality, or order in a sequence. These capabil- and a let form is introduce which does not require
tiple constructors (of the same type) can use the ities are defined as typeclasses in Haskell.
the in keyword.
2009 Justin Bailey.
4
jgbailey@codeslower.com



If and IO if can be tricky when used with let result l
file 1 do
IO. Conceptually it is no different from an if in
if -
f o readFile file
any other context, but intuitively it is hard to de-
th en 1
putStrLn ("The file is I
velop. Consider the function doesFileExists from
else 0
show (length f)
System.Directory:
return result
++ Il bytes long.")
doesFileExist : FilePath 1 IO Bool
Again, notice where return is. We don't put it in An alternative syntax uses semi-colons and braces.
the let statement. Instead we use it once at the end A do is still required, but indention is unnecessary.
The if statement has this "signature":
of the function.
This code shows a case example, but the principle
if-then-else : Bool 1 a lala
applies to if as well:
That is, it takes a Bool value and evaluates to some Multiple do's When using do with if or case, count. Bytes3 =
other value based on the condition. From the type another do is required if either branch has multiple do
signatures it is clear that doesFileExist cannot be statements. An example with if:
putStrLn "I Enter a filename."
used directly by if:
args getLine
countBytesl f =
case args of
wrong fileName =
do
I
0 1 putStrLn "No args given."
if doesFileExist fileName
putStrLn Enter a filename."
file 1 do { f o readFile file;
then
args getLine
putStrLn ("The file is II +
else
if length args ffi 0
show (length f)
no 'do'.
II
That is, doesFileExist results in an IO Bool value,
then putStrLn "No filename given."
++ bytes long.");
while if wants a Bool value. Instead, the correct
else
value must be "extracted" by running the IO ac-
- multiple statements require
Export
tion:
- a new 'do'.
See the section on module on page 6.
rightl fileName = do
do
doesFileExist fileName
f - readFile args
If, Then, Else
if
putStrLn ("The file is Il
then return 1
show (length f)
Remember, if always "returns" a value. It is an
else return 0
+ II bytes long.")
expression, not just a control flow statement. This
function tests if the string given starts with a lower
Notice the use of ret urn. Because do puts us "in- And one with case:
case letter and, if so, converts it to upper case:
side" the IO monad, we can't "get out" except
countBytes2 =
- Use pattern-matching to
through return. Note that we don't have to use
if inline here- -we can also use let to evaluate the do
- get first character
condition and get a value first:
putStrLn "Enter a filename."
sentenceCase (srest) =
args a getLine
if isLower S
right2 fileName i do
case args of
then toUpper S : rest
doesFileExist fileName
I 1 putStrLn "No args given."
else S : rest
2009 Justin Bailey.
5
jgbailey@codeslower.com



- Anything else is empty string
silly example which gives the sum of a list of num- A module can only be defined in one file, though
sentenceCase I
bers, their average, and their median:
its exports may come from multiple sources. To
listStats
make a Haskell file a module, add a module
m i
just
Import
declaration at the top:
let numbers i [1,3. ml
See the section on module on page 6.
total = sum numbers
module MyModule where
mid i head (take (m 'div' 2)
numbers)
Module names must start with a capital letter but
In
in "total: II ++ show total ++
otherwise can include periods, numbers and un-
See let on page 6.
I mid: II ++ show mid
derscores. Periods are used to give sense of struc-
ture, and Haskell compilers will use them as indi-
Deconstruction The left-hand of
cations of the directory a particular source file is,
Infix, infixl and infixr
side a let def-
inition can also destructure its argument, in case but otherwise they have no meaning.
See the section on operators on page 11.
sub-components are to be accessed. This definition The Haskell community has standardized a set
would extract the first three characters from a string of top-level module names such as Data, System,
Instance
Net work, etc. Be sure to consult them for an appro-
firstThree str i
priate place for your own module if you plan on
See the section on class on page 3.
let (a:b:c:_) I str
releasing it to the public.
in "Initial three characters are: II ++
Let
show a + + I
Imports The Haskell standard libraries are di-
show b ++ Il and II
vided into a number of modules. The functionality
Local functions can be defined within a function us-
show C
provided by those libraries is accessed import-
The
by
ing let. let keyword must always be followed
Note that this is different than the following, which ing into your source file. To import all
in
the
everything
by in. The must appear in same column as
only works if the string has three characters:
exported by a library, just use the module name:
the let keyword. Functions defined have access to
all other functions and variables within the same onlyThree str =
import Text.Read
scope (including those defined by let). In this ex- let (a:b:c:[) = str
ample, mult multiplies its argument n by x, which in "The characters given are: II  T
Everything means everything: functions, data types
I II
and constructors, class declarations, and other
was passed to the original mult iples. mult is used
show a +t ++ sh OW b ++
even
by map to give the multiples of X up to 10:
". 1 and Il ++ show C
modules imported and then exported by the that
module. Importing selectively is accomplished by
multiples X -
Of
giving a list of names to import. For example, here
let mult n =n * X
we import some functions from Text .Read:
in map mult [1..10]
See the section on cas e on page 2.
import Text.Read (readParen, lex)
let "functions" with no arguments are actually Module
Data types can imported in a number of ways. We
constants and, once evaluated, will not evaluate
can just import the and no constructors:
useful
type
again. This is
for capturing common por- A module is a compilation unit which exports func-
tions of your function and re-using them. Here is a tions, types, classes, instances, and other modules. import Text.Read (Lexeme)
2009 Justin Bailey.
6
jgbailey@codeslower.com



Of course, this prevents our module from pattern- Instance Declarations It must be noted that Exports If an export list is not provided, then all
matching on the values of type Lexeme. We can instance declarations cannot be excluded from im- functions, types, constructors, etc. will be available
import one or more constructors explicitly:
port: all instance declarations in a module will be to anyone importing the module. Note that any im-
imported when the module is imported.
ported modules are: not exported in this case. Limit-
import Text.Read (Lexeme(Ident, Symbol))
ing the names exported is accomplished by adding
a parenthesized list of names before the where key-
All constructors for a given type can also be im- Qualified Imports The names exported by a word:
ported:
module (i.e., functions, types, operators, etc.) can
have a prefix attached through qualified imports. module MyModule (MyType
import Text.Read (Lexeme(..))
This is particularly useful for modules which have
MyClass
a large number of functions having the same name 1 my Funcl
We can also import types and classes defined in the
as Prelude functions. Data.Set is a good example:
module:
where
import Text.Read (Read, Reads)
import qualified Data.Set as Set
The same syntax as used for importing can be used
In the case of classes, we can import the functions This form requires any function, type, constructor here to specify which functions, types, construc-
defined for a class using syntax similar to import- or other name exported by Data.Set to now be pre- tors, and classes are exported, with a few differ-
ing constructors for data types:
fixed with the alias (i.e., Set) given. Here is one way ences. If a module imports another module, it can
to remove all duplicates from a list:
also export that module:
import Text.Read (Read(readsPrec
readList))
removeDups a i
module MyBigModule (module Data.Set
Set.toList (Set.fromList a)
module Data.Char)
Note that, unlike data types, all class functions are
where
imported unless explicitly excluded. To only import A second form does not create an alias. Instead,
the class, we use this syntax:
the prefix becomes the module name. We can write import Data.Set
a simple function to check if a string is all upper import Data.Char
import Text.Read (Read0)
case:
A module can even re-export itself, which can be
useful when all local definitions and a
im-
Exclusions If most, but not all, names are to be import qualified Char
given
ported module are to be exported. Below we
imported from a module, it would be tedious to
export
ourselves and Data. Set, but not Dat a. Char:
list them all. For that reason, imports can also be
allUpper str i
specified via the hiding keyword:
all Char.isUpper str
module AnotherBigModule (module Data.Set
import Data.Char hiding (isControl
- module AnotherBig.Module)
isMark)
Except for the prefix specified, qualified imports where
support the same syntax as normal imports. The
Except for instance declarations, any type, function, name imported can be limited in the same ways as import Data.Set
constructor or class can be hidden.
described above.
import Data.Char
2009 Justin Bailey.
7
jgbailey@codeslower.com



Newtype
Finally, it should be noted that any deriving IName (Person fl) i
clause which can be attached to a data declaration Person (lower f) (lower 1)
While data introduces new values and type just can also be used when declaring a newtype.
creates synonyms, newtype falls somewhere be-
Because type is just a synonym, it cannot declare
tween. The syntax for newtype is quite restricted-
multiple constructors the way data can. Type vari-
Return
only one constructor can be defined, and that con-
ables can be used, but there cannot be more than
structor can only take one argument. Continuing See do on page 4.
the type variables declared with the original type.
the above example, we can define a Phone type as
That means a synonym like the following is possi-
follows:
ble:
Type
newtype Home i H String
This keyword defines a type synonym (i.e., alias). type NotSure a i Maybe a
newtype Work i W String
This keyword does not define a new type, like data but this not:
data Phone = Phone Home Work
or newt ype. It is useful for documenting code but
As opposed to type, the H and W "values" on otherwise has no effect on the actual type of a given type NotSure a b = Maybe a
function or value. For example, a Person data
Phone are not just String values. The typechecker
type Note that
variables can
could be defined as:
fewer type
be used, which
treats them as entirely new types. That means our
useful in certain instances.
lowerName function from above would not compile. data Person = Person String String
The following produces a type error:
where the first constructor argument represents Where
IPhone (Phone hm wk) i
their first name and the second their last. How- Similar to let, where defines local functions and
Phone (lower hm) (lower wk)
ever, the order and meaning of the two arguments constants. The scope of a where definition is the
is not very clear. A type declaration can help:
current function. If a function is broken into multi-
Instead, we must use pattern-matching to get to the
definitions
then the
"values" to which we apply lower:
type FirstName = String
ple
through pattern-matching,
scope of a particular where clause only applies to
type LastName = String
IPhone (Phone (H hm) (W wk)) i
data Person = Person First Name LastName
that definition. For example, the function result
Ph one (H (lower hm)) (W (lower wk))
below has a different meaning depending on the
Because type introduces a synonym, type checking arguments given to the function strlen:
The key observation is that this keyword does not is not affected in any way. The function lower, de-
introduce a new value; instead it introduces a new fined as:
strlen I = result
type. This gives us two very useful properties:
where result = "No string given!"
II
o No runtime cost is associated with the new lower S i map toLower S
strlen f = result ++ characters long!"
type, since it does not actually produce new
where result i show (length f)
values. In other words, newtypes are abso- which has the type
lutely free!
lower : String 1 String
Where vs. Let A wher e clause can only be de-
The type-checker is able to enforce that com-
fined at the level of a function definition. Usually,
mon types such as Int or String are used in can be used on values with the type FirstName or that is identical to the scope of let definition. The
restricted ways, specified by the programmer. LastName just as easily:
only difference is when guards are being used. The
2009 Justin Bailey.
8
jgbailey@codeslower.com



scope of the where clause extends over all guards. data Bar i Bil (Maybe Int) Baz
bind the value to. This facility is used below to
In contrast, the scope of a let expression is only
bind the head of the list in 1 for display, while also
the current function clause and guard, if any.
and recalling the definition of Maybe from page 2 binding the entire list to ls in order to compute its
we can match on nested Maybe values when Bil is length:
present:
Declarations, Etc.
len Is@(1:_) = "List starts with II -
f (Bil (Just ))
show 1 ++ " and is Il + +
The following section details rules on function dec- f (Bil Nothing)
show (length Is) + + I items long."
larations, list comprehensions, and other areas of f Baz
len I = "List is empty!"
the language.
Pattern-matching also allows values to be assigned
to variables. For example, this function determines Guards Boolean functions can be used as
Function Definition
if the string given is empty or not. If not, the value "guards" in function definitions along with pattern
Functions are defined by declaring their name, any bound to str is converted to lower case:
matching. An example without pattern matching:
arguments, and an equals sign:
toLowerStr I = I
which n
square X - X * X
toLowerStr str I map toLower str
I n ffi 0 = "zero!"
even n il "even!"
All functions names must start with a lowercase let- Note that str above is similer to - in that it will
otherwise i "odd!"
ter or It is a syntax error otherwise.
match anything; the only difference is that the
value matched is also given a name.
Notice otherwise - it always evaluates to true and
Pattern Matching Multiple "clauses" of a func-
can be used to specify a "default" branch.
tion can be defined by "pattern-matching" on the n + k Patterns This (sometimes controversial) Guards can be used with patterns. Here is a
values of arguments. Here, the the agr ee function pattern-matching facility makes it easy to match function that determines if the first character in a
has four separate cases:
certain kinds of numeric expressions. The idea string is upper or lower case:
is to define a base
"n"
- Matches when the string "y" is given.
case (the portion) with a what I = "empty string!"
agreel "y" i "Great!"
constant number for matching, and then to define what (c:
- Matches when the string "n" is given.
other matches (the "k" portion) as additives to the
isUpper C i "upper case!"
agreel "n" I "Too bad."
base case. Here is a rather inefficient way of testing
isLower C = "lower case"
- Matches when string beginning
if a number is even or not:
otherwise = "not a letter!"
- with 'y' given.
isEven 0 = True
agreel (y:_) l "YAHOO!"
isEven 1 = False
Matching & Guard Order Pattern-matching
-- Matches for any other value given.
isEven (n + 2) = isEven n
proceeds in top to bottom order. Similarly, guard
agreel "SO SAD."
expressions are tested from top to bottom. For ex-
I
ample, neither of these functions would be very in-
Note that the character is a wildcard and Argument Capture Argument capture is useful
teresting:
matches any value.
for pattern-matching a value and using it, without
Pattern matching can extend to nested values. declaring an extra variable. Use an '@' symbol in allEmpty - False
Assuming this data declaration:
between the pattern to match and the variable to allEmpty I I True
C 2009 Justin Bailey.
9
jgbailey@codeslower.com



the type of a particular value, even if the value isn't code when using a Nothing constructor. Nothing
alwaysEven n
present.
has type Maybe a but, if not enough other informa-
I otherwise = False
For example, define a class for default values: tion is available, Haskell must be told what a is.
n 'div' 2 ffi 0 = True
Some example default values:
class Def a where
defValue : a 1 a
- Return "Just False"
Record Syntax Normally pattern matching OC-
defMB = defValue (Nothing : Maybe Bool)
curs based on the position of arguments in the The idea is you give de: fValue a value of the right - Return "Just ' !"
value being matched. Types declared with record type and it gives you back a default value for that defMC
= defValue (Nothing : Maybe Char)
syntax, however, can match based on those record type. Defining instances for basic types is easy:
names. Given this data type:
instance Def Bool where
List Comprehensions
defValue = False
data Color = C { red
A list comprehension consists of four types of ele-
green
instance Def Char where
ments: generators, guards, local bindings, and targets.
blue : Int }
defValue
A list comprehension creates a list of target values
based on the
and
we
This
can match on green only:
Maybe is a littler trickier, because we want to get
generators guards given.
comprehension generates all squares:
isGreenZero
=
a default value for the type, but the constructor
(C { green 0 }) i True
= * X X
isGreenZero
might be Nothing. The following definition would squares [x
[1.11
i False
work, but it's not optimal since we get Nothing
x <- [1..] generates a list of all Int eger values
Argument capture is possible with this syntax, al- when Nothing is passed in.
and puts them in x, one by one. X * X creates each
though it gets clunky. Continuing the above, we instance Def a => Def (Maybe a) where
element of the list by multiplying X by itself.
now define a Pixel type and a function to replace defValue
Guards allow certain elements
(Just x) = Just (defValue x)
to be excluded.
values with non-zero green components with all defValue Nothing i Nothing
The following shows how divisors for a given num-
black:
ber (excluding itself) can be calculated. Notice how
We'd rather get a Just (default value) back instead. d is used in both the
and
expression.
=
guard
data Pixel P Color
Here is where a lazy pattern saves us - we can pre-
target
tend that we've matched Just X and use that to get divisors n i
- Color value untouched if green is 0
a default value, even if Nothing is given:
[dld o [1..(n 'div' 2)]
set Green (P col@(C { green = 0 })) i P col
n 'mod' d ffi 0]
set Green - P (C 0 0 0)
instance Def a => Def (Maybe a) where
defValue (Just x) = Just (defValue x)
Local bindings provide new definitions for use in
the generated expression or subsequent generators
Lazy Patterns This syntax, also known as ir- As long as the value x is not actually evaluated, and
is to
guards. Below, Z used represent the mini-
refutable patterns, allows pattern matches which al- we're safe. None of the base types need to look at X
of
" 
mum a and b:
ways succeed. That means any clause using the (see the - matches they use), so things will work
pattern will succeed, but if it tries to actually use just fine.
strange = [(a,z) a [1..3]
the matched value an error may occur. This is gen- One wrinkle with the above is that we must
b [1..3]
erally useful when an action should be taken on provide type annotations in the interpreter or the
C [1..3]
2009 Justin Bailey.
10
jgbailey@codeslower.com



let Z i min a b
(reverse (dropWhile isSpace
Precedence and associativity make many of the
Z < C
(reverse s)))
rules of arithmetic work "as expected." For ex-
in trim last ++ Il II trim first
ample, consider these minor updates to the prece-
Comprehensions are not limited to numbers. Any
dence of addition and multiplication:
list will do. All upper case letters can be generated: > Il Haskell I # # II Curry I
Curry, Haskell
infixl 8 'plusl'
ups =
plusl a b l a + b
[clc - min Bound : maxBound
Of course, full pattern matching, guards, etc. are infixl 7 'mult1'
' isUpper C
available in this form. Type signatures are a bit dif- multl a b a * b
ferent, though. The operator "name" must appear
Or, to find all occurrences of a particular break in parentheses:
The results are surprising:
value br in a list word (indexing from 0):
(##) : String 1 String 1 String
>2+ 3 * 5
idxs word br i
17
[1(i,c) zip [0..] word
Allowable symbols which can be used to define op- >> 2 'plusl' 3 'multl' 5
C ffi br]
erators are:
25
A unique feature of list comprehensions is that pat- # $ % & *
Reversing associativity also has interesting effects.
tern matching failures do not cause an error; they However, there are several "operators" which can- Redefining division as right associative:
are just excluded from the resulting list.
not be redefined. They are: <-, -> and =. The last, infixr 7 'divl'
=, cannot be redefined by itself, but can be used as divl a b i a / b
Operators
part of multi-character operator. The "bind" func-
tion, >> =, is one example.
We get interesting results:
There are very few predefined "operators" in
Haskell- most that appear predefined are actually
> 20 / 2 / 2
Precedence & Associativity The precedence 5.0
syntax (e.g., "-"). Instead, operators are simply
functions that take two arguments and have spe- and associativity, collectively called fixity, of any >> 20 'divl' 2 'divl' 2
operator can be set through the infix, infixr and 20.0
cial syntactic support. Any so-called operator can
infixl keywords. These can be applied both to
be applied as a prefix function using parentheses:
top-level functions and to local definitions. The
Currying
3 + 4 ffi (+) 3 4
syntax is:
In Haskell, functions do not have to get all of
To define a new operator, simply define it as a nor- infix I infixr I infixl precedence op
their arguments at once. For example, consider the
mal function, except the operator appears between
convertOnly function, which only converts certain
the two arguments. Here's one which takes inserts where precedence varies from 0 to 9. Op can actu- elements of string depending on a test:
a comma between two strings and ensures no extra ally be any function which takes two arguments
(i.e., any binary operation). Whether the operator convertOnly test change str =
spaces appear:
is left or right associative is specified by infixl or
map ("c1 if test C
first ## last i
infixr, respectively. Such infix declarations have
then change C
let trim S = drop While isSpace
no associativity.
else c) str
2009 Justin Bailey.
11
jgbailey@codeslower.com



Using convertUnly, we can write the 133t function That is, convertUpper can take two arguments. The changes. "Updating" is really a copy operation,
which converts certain letters to numbers:
first is the conversion function which converts indi- with new values in the fields that "changed." For
vidual characters and the second is the string to be example, using the Color type defined earlier, we
133t il convertOnly isL33t toL33t
converted.
can write a function that sets the green field to zero
where
A curried form of any function which takes easily:
isL33t 'o' = True
multiple arguments can be created. One way to
isL33t 'a' = True
think of this is that each "arrow" in the function's noGreenl (C r b) =Cr0b
- etc.
signature represents a new function which can be The above is a bit verbose and can be rewriten us-
isL33t - False
created by supplying one more argument.
ing record syntax. This kind of "update" only sets
toL33t 'o' = '0'
values for the field(s) specified and copies the rest:
toL33t 'a' i 4'
Sections Operators are functions, and they can noGreen2
- etc.
C = C { green = 0 }
be curried like any other. For example, a curried
toL33t C i C
version of "+" can be written as:
Here we capture the Color value in C and return a
new Color value. That value happens to have the
Notice that 133t has no arguments specified. Also, add10 i (+) 10
same value for red and blue as C and it's green
the final argument to convert Only is not given.
component is 0. We can combine this with pattern
However, the type signature of 133t tells the whole However, this can be unwieldy and hard to read. matching to set the green and blue fields to equal
story:
"Sections" are curried operators, using parenthe- the red field:
ses. Here is add10 using sections:
133t : String 1 String
makeGrey C@(C { red = r ) =
add10 = (10 +)
C { green i r, blue i r
That is, 133t takes a string and produces a string.
It is a "constant", in the sense that 133t always re- The supplied argument can be on the right or left, Notice we must use argument capture ("c@") to get
turns a value that is a function which takes a string which indicates what position it should take. This the Color value and pattern matching with record
and produces a string. 133t returns a "curried" is important for operations such as concatenation: syntax ("C { red = rj ) to get the inner red field.
form of convert0nly, where only two of its three onLeft str = + ++ str)
arguments have been supplied.
onRight str = (str ++)
Anonymous Functions
This can be taken further. Say we want to write
An anonymous function (i.e., a lambda expression
a function which only changes upper case letters. Which produces quite different results:
or lambda for short), is a function without a name.
We know the test to apply, isUpper, but we don't
> onLeft "foo" "bar"
They can be defined at any time like so:
want to specify the conversion. That function can
"barfoo"
be written as:
C 1 (c, c)
> onRight "foo" "bar"
"foob ar"
which defines a function which takes an argument
convert Upper i convertOnly isUpper
and returns a tuple containing that argument in
which has the type signature:
"Updating" values and record syntax
both positions. They are useful for simple func-
tions which don't need a name. The following de-
convert Upper : (Char 1 Char)
Haskell is a pure language and, as such, has no termines if a string has mixed case (or is all whites-
1 String 1 String
mutable state. That is, once a value is set it never pace):
2009 Justin Bailey.
12
jgbailey@codeslower.com



mixedCase str i
However, for efficiency or other reasons you Haskell cannot compile that function because it
all (C 1 isSpace C ffl
may only want to allow Int types. You would does not know the type of X. We must limit the
isLower C ff
accomplish that with a type signature:
type through an annotation:
isUpper c) str
negateAll : [Int] 1 [Int]
canParselnt X i show ((read x) : Int)
Of course, lambdas can be the returned from func-
tions too. This classic returns a function which will Type signatures can appear on top-level func- Annotations have the same syntax as type signa-
tures, but adorn
then multiply its argument by the one originally tions and nested let or where definitions. Gener-
may
any expression.
given:
ally this is useful for documentation, although in
some cases they are needed to prevent polymor- Unit
multBy n = m 1 n * m
phism. A type signature is first the name of the
() - "unit" type and "unit" value. The value and
item which will be typed, followed a ::: fol-
For example:
by
type that represents no useful information.
lowed by the types. An example of this has already
> let mult10 i multBy 10
been seen above.
>> mult10 10
Type signatures do not need to appear directly Contributors
100
above their implementation. They can be specified
anywhere in the containing module (yes, even be- My thanks to those who contributed patches and
low!). Multiple items with the same signature can useful suggestions: Dave Bayer, Cale Gibbard,
Type Signatures
also be defined together:
Stephen Hicks, Kurt Hutchinson, Johan Kiviniemi,
Haskell supports full type inference, meaning in
Adrian Neumann, Barak Pearlmutter, Lanny Rip-
pos, neg : Int 1 Int
most cases no types have to be written down. Type
ple, Markus Roberts, Holger Siegel, Leif Warner,
signatures are still useful for at least two reasons.
and Jeff Zaroyko.
Documentation Even if the compiler can figure pos X X 0 = negate X
Version
out the types of your functions, other pro-
otherwise = X
grammers or even yourself might not be able
This is version 1.10. The source can be found
to later. Writing the type signatures on all neg y
0 = negate y
at GitHub-. The latest released version of the
top-level functions is considered very good
otherwise = y
PDF can be downloaded from Hackage. Visit
form.
Codeslower.com* for other projects and writings.
Type Annotations Sometimes Haskell cannot
Specialization- Typeclasses allow functions with
determine what type is meant. The classic demon-
overloading. For example, a function to
stration of this is the so-called "show - read" prob-
negate any list of numbers has the signature:
lem:
negateAll : Num a => [al 1 aj
canParselnt X = show (read x)
http://github. com/m4dc4p/cheatshe
http: 7/hackage.haskell. org/ pin/nackage- scripts/packag ge/Chea au Sheet
4http://blog. codeslover.com/
2009 Justin Bailey.
13
jgbailey@codeslower.com