
EN 301 549 Accessibility Declaration of Conformance

Date of Report: February 3, 2022
Name of Product: NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates
Description of Product: .NET is a developer platform made up of tools, programming languages, and libraries for building many different types of applications. ASP.NET Core is a cross-platform, high-performance, open-source framework for building modern, cloud-enabled, Internet-connected apps. The templates provided for ASP .NET Core developer a way to easily create new projects either from within Visual Studio, or from the .NET command line. For the most accessible experience use the latest release of .NET and Visual Studio for your web applications.
Platform: Web
Product Build: 6.0.100
Accessibility website: Microsoft Accessibility
For assistance with this report, please email us.

Section 1 Scope
This EN 301 549 V2.1.2 (PDF) Accessibility Conformance Report specifies the functional accessibility requirements applicable to Microsoft ICT products and services.
Section 2 References
Section 3 Definitions and abbreviations
Section 4 Functional Statements

Functional Accessibility Requirements
Section 5 Generic Requirements


Section 6 ICT with two-way voice communication
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 7 ICT with video capabilities
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 8 Hardware
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 9 Web
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 10 Non-web documents
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 11 Software


Section 11 Software – Closed Functionality
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.

Section 12 Documentation and support services


Section 13 ICT providing relay or emergency service access
This section does not apply to NET 6.0 - ASP.NET Core Project Templates.
