
Microsoft Accessibility Conformance Report
WCAG 2.2 Edition
(Based on VPAT® Version 2.5)
Name of Product/Version: .NET MAUI VS Code Extension / Continuous Release
Platform: Windows, Linux, Mac
Report Date: March 27, 2025
Product Description: The .NET MAUI VS Code Extension, depending upon the C# Dev Kit, provides easy-to-get-started access to the cross-platform tools required to develop .NET mobile and desktop apps with VS Code on Windows, macOS, and Linux.
Contact Information: Enterprise Disability Desk
Website: Microsoft Accessibility
Evaluation Methods Used
Microsoft uses established industry standards, including the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, Section 508, and EN 301 549, to guide product evaluation during development and throughout the product lifecycle. Microsoft’s accessibility evaluation assessments incorporate a variety of measures, which can include: (i) conducting automated testing using a variety of proprietary and external tools; (ii) performing inspection and manual testing with a keyboard and adaptive technologies, such as screen readers and speech recognition software; and (iii) testing by individuals with disabilities. Conformance to the accessibility standards documented in this Conformance Report was evaluated according to the Department of Homeland Security Trusted Tester Program.
Applicable Standards/Guidelines
This report covers the degree of conformance for the following accessibility standard/guidelines:

Terms
The terms used in the Conformance Level information are defined as follows:
Supports: The functionality of the product has at least one method that meets the criterion without known defects or meets with equivalent facilitation.
Partially Supports: Some functionality of the product does not meet the criterion.
Does Not Support: The majority of product functionality does not meet the criterion.
Not Applicable: The criterion is not relevant to the product.
Not Evaluated: The product has not been evaluated against the criterion. This can only be used in WCAG Level AAA.

Note: For criteria marked “Supports,” substantial conformance with the criterion by the product or service has been determined through the Evaluation Testing, which includes a mix of automated and manual testing, as described above.

Note: In the tables below, for all criteria marked “Not Applicable,” the specific feature covered by that criterion is not part of the product. For example:
If pre-recorded audio-only or video-only content is not part of a product, then WCAG criterion 1.2.1 Audio-only and Video-only (Prerecorded) will be marked “Not Applicable.”

WCAG 2.x Report
Note: When reporting on conformance with the WCAG 2.x Success Criteria, they are scoped for full pages, complete processes, and accessibility-supported ways of using technology as documented in the WCAG 2.0 Conformance Requirements.

Table 1: Success Criteria, Level A

Table 2: Success Criteria, Level AA

Table 3: Success Criteria, Level AAA
Disclaimer
© 2025 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. The names of actual companies and products mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners. The information contained in this document represents the current view of Microsoft Corporation on the issues discussed as of the date of publication. Microsoft cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information presented after the date of publication.
Microsoft’s WCAG 2.2 conformance reports provide the information included in ITI’s “VPAT® Rev 2.5 WCAG (November 2023)” template. “Voluntary Product Accessibility Template” and “VPAT” are registered service marks of the Information Technology Industry Council (ITI). This document includes material copied from or derived from the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 2.2). Copyright © World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). (2023). This document is not the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) and should not be used as a substitute for it. Excerpts of WCAG are referenced solely for purposes of detailing Microsoft’s conformance with the relevant provisions. A full and complete copy of the Guidelines is available from the W3C WAI.
Microsoft regularly updates its websites and provides new information about the accessibility of products as that information becomes available.
Customization of the product voids this conformance statement from Microsoft. Customers may make independent conformance statements if they have conducted due diligence to meet all relevant requirements for their customization. 
Please consult with Assistive Technology (AT) vendors for compatibility specifications of specific AT products. 
This document is for informational purposes only. MICROSOFT MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, IN THIS DOCUMENT.
